hello and good afternoon my name is Marc
Caron I'm here with my co-host for the
spirit plant medicine conference Steve
mr. Steven Greg good friend glad to be
here and today we have a very special
guest on our little talk about our
speakers for the upcoming conference we
have mr. crisp bass now Chris is a
professor emeritus in the Department of
Philosophy and religious studies at
Youngstown State University where he
taught for 33 years
he is also adjunct faculty at the
California Institute of integral studies
and a fellow at the Institute of noetic
Sciences he's an award-winning teacher
and Chris's work explores the
philosophical implications of
non-ordinary states of consciousness
especially psychedelic states chris has
also written three books and one is
called lifestyles another dark night
sorry life cycles dark night early dawn
and the living classroom and his new
book is LSD in the mind of the universe
which is actually the title of his talk
as well for the conference coming up in
actually a month tomorrow we start in
four weeks so welcome Chris pleasure to
see you again have a conversation it's
always great to hear what you have to
say and we look forward to having me at
the conference again but as we get
started maybe you can introduce yourself
and let our viewers you know know a
little bit about your story and the work
that you've done in terms of I think
we're just talking about you know 73
high dosage LSD journey - as a mind in
the mind of a psychologist or
philosopher if I remember correctly from
last year yeah well I was actually a
professor of religious studies and I
taught in a philosophy religious studies
program at the University which is part
of a the Ohio State system up in the
northeast corner of the state and I'm
really excited about the conference I'm
very very pleased that the book is
actually being released for the first
time anywhere at the conference and
after all the years of research and all
the years of writing finally it's it's
coming out and allowing me to have a
conversation that I've been waiting to
have for a long time because basically
in order to do psychedelic
work myself to explore the philosophical
potential of psychedelic states I had to
do all this work underground so it was
hidden from my colleagues I couldn't
really talk about it I'm on my day job I
was a conventional you know maybe not so
conventional but I was a religious
studies professor none of my students
knew about my work so this is a
conversation that I've been waiting for
a long time I had to wait until after I
retired to have it I had to wait until
after I was passed the statute of
limitations for my psychedelic crimes
and I've been I'm just delighted to
begin this conversation here at the
conference and then the workshop will do
following the weekend after the
conference great Wow yeah so oh gosh you
know we can all ask all kinds of
questions I don't know it's that
introduction gave me about 10 of them
right now why don't you fire went out
Denmark oh I just you know might not
even be a question now that I think
about it but the big part that struck me
there Chris was talking about how he to
hide the work from your colleagues doing
it underground and even the
consideration of the statue of
limitations running out before you can
talk about these things you know it's a
really profoundly thought-out process in
terms of what you had to deal with even
to do your research so I wanted to
acknowledge that and I guess the
question is what was the biggest
challenge in terms of keeping it all
kind of contained into yourself well I
knew that silence was going to be the
prerequisite that would allow me to do
this work so I took that responsibility
when I did the work but over the long
term I did not appreciate that first of
all the loneliness would become the
issue that it became be kind of the
inability to share your experiences the
inability to engage in conversations
like that if I lived in San Francisco
where there's you know are in Vancouver
where there's an active psychedelic
community it would have been different
but I lived in Ohio and so there really
wasn't an act
psychedelic community here to share my
experiences with and to have the
conversation but I found actually that
in the long term after that I had
finished the work I did this work I did
73 high-dose sessions between 1979 in
1999 and so I waited 20 years you know
to write the book to tell the full story
everything about you know my story and
dark Beverly dawn but I really didn't
tell the full story until now what I
found was that not being able to talk
about your experiences actually inhibits
or compromises your ability to fully
integrate your experiences into your
life so I was able to integrate them at
one level of a sort of a personal
psychological level but I wasn't able to
integrate them into my full person I'm a
teacher I love to learn knowledge and to
share that knowledge with students I
could not teach from these experiences I
could not draw upon the things I had
learned and I found that that
cumulatively made me sick literally kind
of made me psychologically sick like
living in the closet it's just sickness
making for anybody what is keeping them
in the closet so being in a psychedelic
closet was really burden and now that
the first level of the burden is off by
writing the book and going public and
the second level has been lifting as I
have begun to talk about this material
and I hope this will continue to deep
and in the years ahead
and if I have the give-and-take of
conversation mm-hmm well that's quite
understandable thank you for sharing
that with us there's a good question I
think mark but now let's talk about the
material itself even what I make one
comment about that because I think it's
a really important part of what we're
seeing in our community here now as well
especially in the past year since the
last conference is integration being the
biggest you know kind of buzzword now
and you talked about that in terms of
your isolation and being alone
that and how important that is and
that's what we're seeing in terms of the
community that we're creating and not
even really creating we're bringing
people together because you know we're
all out there which is kind of you know
pulling it together like hub and so I
think it was really important that you
talk about that and that's the big part
so people can talk about their
experiences which is a big part of what
our conference is because it's not just
for you know doctors and practitioners
naturopaths and things it's for people
who are looking to you know connect with
people so they can actually share talk
about their experiences and go even
deeper with their own work so thank you
really for touching on that and I think
it's really important especially
considering you know that 20 years of
doing it in the closet I think that I'm
really really pleased to see integration
be discussed more there's an anthology
that's going to be coming out in London
within a year all about integration
writing of course with the technology
that we have with with the session
material in the sacred medicines we have
we can blow out the system you know
increasingly easy but integrating those
experiences and integrating you know we
can't stay in these states that's clear
but learning how to live with the
memories of deep immersion in the
universe using those memories skillfully
as part of your daily meditation
practice and your social integration
that's really important and and another
aspect for me has been I wrote the
living classroom because I found that
while my students never learned about
never knew about my psychedelic work
they were actually being activated by my
private works you know because
consciousness is not private it's an
open toe healed and the deeper I went
the more deeply my students are being
drawn implicitly into my work and that's
what really led me to address this and
dark and early dawn and then to write
this small book the living classroom
about fields of consciousness and groups
well I was going to try to lead you into
some of the content of the material that
you learn but as long as we're on
integration maybe we should follow up a
little bit more
on that so with this question what do
you think are the most important aspects
of integration for you know typical
person who's doing say you know couple
of ayahuasca two-three ayahuasca session
weekends a year or something like that
maybe working with psilocybin mushrooms
a bit and then they're living in you
know Vancouver you know or some urban
center you know what what do you think
are the the most helpful things that
those people can do to make sure that
they try to keep that they keep those
channels open and eat themselves
grounded properly yeah good question um
you know I don't think I have a pad
answer for that I'd like more dialogue
around it but basically the things that
spring to mind is first in your sessions
emphasizing clean contact controlling
the variables controlling the isolation
so that you have clean contact with
these reality it's not smudgy contract
any confusion clean contact and then
first step is remembering your sessions
so writing up a detailed description
within 24 hours because these memories
fade over time and and then once
personally once I write up a session I
never change it I've learned that trying
to edit it clean it up you can lose some
things yeah and I actually when I'm
course this is more relevant perhaps
when you're pushing way way deep beyond
conventional reality just to write a
good session of I listen to the music
that I played during the session while
I'm writing up my account because it
allows me to get deeper into my memories
and get them down on paper so I think
the other thing I think is important is
a daily spiritual practice whatever form
yoga and meditation brutal thumb is the
deeper you're going into non-ordinary
States the stronger should be your daily
practice well that's a good one then
just you know people use art to to bring
their sessions hold on to their sessions
for me I've been given lots of teachings
in my sessions and I've been
you have been given practices so my
responsibility is to try to live by that
teaching as best I can and to cultivate
those practices to actually do the
assignments that I was given and then I
think sharing with other people that's
really critical to listen to their
experiences and to share your
experiences that is this nothing that
can replace that mm-hmm
wonderful so now can we get into some of
the even shorter what no it's not that
wise I'm not looking for my turn I'm
looking for the material you know yeah
it's actually not about it's not about
any of us really and that's I just
having fun with my friend that's all
yeah okay well okay so from my point of
view then yeah you know I you know I've
read this book and I'd also read dark
night early dawn and what stands out to
me there's there's so many amazing
things that that have happened that
happened to you during that 20-year
period that people would find stunning
like the whole time when you you know
experienced all your past lives the the
time when they where they grabbed you by
the balls so to speak and made you
become like just about every different
kind of woman on the planet but the
ultimate for from my point of view is is
what most affects everybody on this
planet which is what you've called the
great death and the Great Awakening and
I wonder if you could elaborate on that
somewhat well let me back up just a
little bit to get the context and then
you bring me back if I don't get back to
it and time you bring me back to this
the birth of the future human okay yes I
found that in when I was working with
these very high levels of LSD and again
this is a protocol that I honestly
sincerely do not recommend that people
follow it's doing individual high-dose
LSD sessions is fine but doing such a
relentless long really completely
rigorous nothing but high-dose LSD
sessions is not something that I would
recommend I would balance high dose low
doses that balance
psilocybin in ayahuasca with LSD but I
did this work starting 40 years ago so I
didn't understand that as well as I
understand now
basically when by working with these
very high doses you can blow open
consciousness and enter into a deeper
level of reality and go through a death
rebirth process and what I found was
that by going back again and again and
again not only does your experience
stabilize at this deeper level of
reality but if you keep going back and
if you keep pushing your own limits you
will go through a death rebirth cycle
again and enter a deeper level of
reality and if you keep pushing you'll
go through another death rebirth and go
through a deeper level of reality and
it's not ego that is simply dying over
and over again but it does really become
the question what is dying in these
advanced deaths and rebirths and I
actually have an appendix which is in
the book which is asking the question
what dies what's actually dying but when
I was charting the overall levels of the
development in my journey identified
five core fundamental cycles of death
and rebirth and this is something I'll
be talking about at the conference first
was going beyond physical identity the
death of self ego death
the second was going into collective
mind the ocean of suffering and some of
the lower levels of sun illiberal
reality the third level going into
archetypal mind really moving deep into
archetypal reality both in terms of this
collective unconscious the species mind
and also into cosmological archetypes of
reality fourth level was going into
oneness the fundamental condition of
oneness and the fifth level is what I
call Diamond luminosity going into the
diamond luminosity what buddhism calls
dharmakaya are the
clear light of absolute reality so all
of my sessions kind of can fall into
these categories and but then while
there is its deepening process and going
into collective dimensions archetypal
dimensions causal oneness and going into
Diamond luminosity I began to have
rhythmic systemic initiations into a
series of ideas that had to do with the
entire human species in fact the entire
trajectory of my experiences were was
not personal it really wasn't primarily
about my personal healing or my personal
development or my personal enlightenment
everything seemed to be converging
around the theme of humanity's
collective transformation that seemed to
be the work of the hour that's what
we're here for that's what we're about
we're at a life-and-death moment for the
species and my work and all of our work
seem to be part of this convergence as
taking place in history taking us
through this transition that we're going
through and this is what I came to call
the birth of the future human leaving it
open-ended what the form of this future
human will take I have my own experience
of it and my own theory of it in a way
and I think it it is a culmination of
the reincarnation project process it
will take us into a different level of
our species evolution it's a shift that
takes place I think at the fundamental
archetypal level of the core blueprint
of the human species we're really
working doing some work that's going to
influence and trigger a pivot in the
blueprint of the human psyche and I
don't think we're going to make this
jump into this new psychological
awareness of the heart and mind without
going through a tremendously painful
transformation process the dark night of
our collective soul which is essentially
time of purification a time of letting
go of the past of time of basically
coming to
terms with the choices we've been making
historically in the past making new
choices choices that a donut reforest
reinforce the stories of hate there are
the stories of class division racial
division religious division the
nationalism which tear our planet apart
the economic divisions which have done
which caused so much damage literally I
think we have to consume the Karma that
those choices have brought us and we've
been making those choices I mean you
know we reincarnate generation by
generation generation so we're carrying
the entire history of the human planet
in our history in our souls in our
stories and as we change those stories
we contribute to a change in the in the
playing field of humanity and so in my
work I've been taken into that process
gone through tremendous exercises of Oh
purification and healing of the
collective psyche psyche the war is that
we've fought and all the things terrible
things were done to each other and have
been taken into what I call deep time in
two dimensions of time where the future
it becomes available becomes as
available as the present and been given
glimpses into the culmination of this
death and rebirth process experienced at
a collective level and then the
transformation of our species into this
higher order of humanity that's coming
forward that to me is the most important
theme of the work because yeah involved
all of our children all of our children
I think where we're going with this is
that it's you know it's I don't know
what the timeline is but it you know in
some relatively near future it is going
to be clear to the whole planet that
this is job number one as Ford Ford used
to call it so how about this question
related to that then you know you listed
off the kind of ways in which the the
sort of human enterprises you know off
track like nationalism races
some religion divisions and perhaps you
know right under there at the top
you know materialist illusion of that
promotes 50 families having half the
plot the wealth on the planet or
whatever that is so given that it
appears that we are as a species so far
away you know I mean lots of people are
making inroads into the transformation
of course but it's you know in total
numbers out of eight seven eight billion
people it's a minuscule number of people
so then given that you know that ninety
eight or nine percent of the planet is
not getting not even aware of this
possibility let alone doing anything to
move in that direction what's what is it
going to take it seems to me it's gonna
take terrible disasters of some kind to
open up a crack what do you think how
can we get as far as we need to get in
as little time as we have that's the
global crisis triggers a cascade of a
series of economic political social
crises that we're seeing not even
environmental oh yeah yes yeah I thought
of I don't have any any secret and the
inside information of the how when and
why of what's happening you know just
that we're going into a global systems
crisis which is being driven by a global
ecological crisis and other imbalances
in the world but then after years of
being shown this very very positive
optimistic fulfilling our evolutionary
destiny it didn't it had never shown me
how how could we possibly make this
transition and you're asking that
question Stephen exactly then one
particular session what I call the Great
Awakening session session 55 took me
into that process and into this trauma
and it also gave me a set of teachings
around how we could actually how we will
make this transition and it has to do
with understanding the dynamics of the
collective psyche that all of our
individual psyches feed into and our
part of we are fractal embodiments of
our collective psyche and all of our
perience as Rupert Sheldrake's talks
about in morphic field theory all of our
experiences being processed collected
and processed at a collective level and
we know something well the basic formula
is this our collective psyche is a field
fields have behaved in certain
predictable ways there is a correlation
between the way the collective psychic
field of humanity will behave as it
enters into extreme crisis and the way
in the future and the way that other
physical systems behave when they go
into what are called nonlinear systems
are far from equilibrium State
the basic vision is this when we're or
go deeper into this century we are going
to go into a period of tremendous pain I
mean just I don't see any way around it
we're going to suffer terribly and in
contrast to anything that's happened
before this pain will not be restricted
to one continent or one part it's going
to be global it's going to be massive
and all of this pain that we are going
to experience individually is going to
be feeding into the collective psyche so
that the collective psyche itself will
be moving into increasingly nonlinear
conditions when a field when the psychic
field of humanity moves into these
nonlinear conditions several if we can
extrapolate lessons from physical fields
we can hypothesize that several things
will be begin to happen first small
perturbations and produce very large
effects so the impact are the effects of
individuals on the outcome of history
will increase oh good one each well
people can have a larger trip on the
future yeah I interrupt for a sec I
think I understand what you mean by
nonlinear conditions but perhaps it
needs a little more clarification can
you go into that a wee bit more
basically and here I'm not a scientist
so my apologies to those who really
could answer this question much better
but basically when you have a system it
develops a balance between energy and
and energy out and if you keep pouring
more and more energy in
that system it becomes increasingly
unstable and when it becomes unstable
it shows characteristics which are not
like it was when it was a stable system
when it becomes so unstable we find that
in nature it can respond to this
instability to draw out new levels of
creativity out of nature itself so
nonlinear systems are highly creative
systems they produce things which we
wouldn't have been predicted previously
and it's fast things changes can take
place very fast when there are nonlinear
conditions so it's just and individuals
can have disproportionate effects on the
outcome in long linear conditions so
technically the term would be in systems
that are in the far from equilibrium
state yeah so creativity spontaneity
fast speed and individuals having larger
influence right so obviously that's a
pretty scary you know prognostication
for the for the decades coming but it
also suggests that when you know that
you know as Leonard Cohen said there's a
crack in everything that's how the light
gets and so what might that look like
you know and I think it might be useful
for people watching this to to imagine
what conditions are what the new human
might be like so that we can recognize
though the Inklings of that Awakening
and ourselves can you elaborate on that
yeah let's remind ourselves that the
human beings that this will be happening
to are thousands and tens of thousands
of years old because we're it will be
happening to souls in human bodies not
simply 200-year beings but hundred
thousand year old beings who have this
very complex psychic history of their
former lives all kind of flowing within
them as they as they enter into time so
my understanding of what has come
through my sessions repeatedly
is that asked without so within so what
is happening on the planet at the
geopolitical level at the geophysical
level is we are trying to become an
integrated planet and get past this
stage of evolution where we are so
fractured and divided as we are
confronting our history geopolitically
we are also confronting our history
inside the history of the soul and the
fragmentations within the soul and the
sessions have shown me have taught me
that there seems to be a synergistic
relationship between engaging a changing
world outside of us as we work to create
a future that is fundamentally different
than the past and a maturation which is
taking place where we kind of integrate
our former lives in a way that needs to
an arising of an awareness that is
intuitive and immediately experienced
awareness that my mind and my heart are
not the age of my body my mind and my
heart are much older than my body and my
relationships are much older than my
present bodies relationships I am living
in time as time as a manifestation of
creative energy everyone around me is
doing this we've been doing it for
generations I think that what we're
witnessing the only way I'm going to put
it a different way
the ego created this global crisis the
ego cannot solve it the soul is the only
thing that can solve it I think we were
making transition from ego consciousness
individual body mind consciousness to
soul consciousness and by soul
consciousness I don't mean simply a
disembodied ego I mean what I call the
diamond soul from all of our history
integrated in a way that generates a
higher level of functioning so that we
begin to live out of a larger platform
and I think we can see this happening
around us when people take up projects
that they know they won't finish in
their lifetime when they are willing to
die so that others can live when they
when they just when their commitments
are not to their own
individual private enhancement but to
the enhancement of larger numbers of
people I think what we're seeing is the
soul those are the symptoms of the soul
emerging in our psychological awareness
we just don't know what to call it
we just think oh this is a great being
this is a Gandhi this is a Martin Luther
King but really what we're seeing is the
maturation of the soul within our
individual lives and their City oh go
ahead do you see a lot of that happening
well just look around us because there
are a lot of people doing a lot of
injurious things but there are a lot of
people doing some magnificent things you
know they are committing themselves to
projects that they'll never see realized
in their lifetime and I think we're
going to see more and more of that as we
really come to terms with the fact that
the way we're living just isn't working
you know the way we've organized our
culture isn't working we need to be
experimenting with new and different
ways of creating an economy creating
social family so on and so forth I think
now here's the thing it's there's no
guarantees in evolution right there's no
guarantee that we're going to come
through this there's no guarantee that
the next form of the human being will be
born successfully but the more we
experience the intelligence of the
universe when we work in our sessions
the more we experience the profound
wisdom that's behind the formation of
galaxies and the formation of solar
systems and the emergence of light that
intelligence seems to think that
Humanity is ready for this transition
gestation is a long process right but
birth is very short very fast and
convulsive yeah I think we have been
maturing through thousands and thousands
of years the soul has been now nature
says it's time to give birth to the to
the soul inside history not just when we
die inside history this is hard work
this is what we're coming into anything
what a beautiful vision it's you know
you know it's this idea of you know
having a vision and having hope that's
gonna kind of keep people going I think
as things collapse that way I'm just
curious
not even be they'll not relevant to the
discussion at hand but I want to ask you
anyway
I you know I gather from reading you
know that the books that they're
teaching as you were receiving are about
humanity and about our journey but you
know that just what you can see with the
naked eye there are many many thousands
of bodies that are much like our Sun
produce heat and light did you ever get
a sense that there are other planets
other species that have that are going
through similar things or have been
through them and have successfully come
through them or any of that sort of
thing you know I've never explored that
particular aspect of things or it was
never put in front of me I mean I never
directed my sessions I'm I tried to set
intentions but deeper intelligence did
all the lay all the groundwork for what
happened in the cemetery it never took
me there but it was just the very nature
of the experiences that it took me into
it was just assumed that we are one
speck in a much larger cosmological
process with life emerging life and life
enlightening and galaxies all over the
place that we are incubating something
taking place on this planet but it
parallels things which are taking place
elsewhere because nature is just fast
and it works it works in groups you know
I see ball two you know these are the
dynamics of evolution so to me I just
assumed when I look up in the night time
in the sky and I see all those stars I
just assume that somewhere there there
is life percolating and struggling and
all sorts of different levels is wrong
with the universe switching tacks a
little there's a segment of the
psychedelic community that's very
devoted to natural plants you know the
the core of your work was with a semi
synthetic substance LSD what what's your
take on that what do you say to those
people that say you know nature knows
best somehow I think nature does know
best in many ways I mean I think natural
plants are very good clean
to work with good ways to work most of
human history has taken it been in
dialog with natural sacred medicines I
don't think to me to make too much of
the difference between synthetic meaning
a man-made human-made medicine and an
organic medicine I don't know that I
would put quite the emphasis on that
that some people do i do think that
around any work with the medicine with
any regularly induced state of
consciousness feels developed so that
there are fields around psilocybin
mushrooms
you know psychic feels that reflect
humanity's history with them there are
fields around ayahuasca I think maybe
that's why people who have never lived
in the Amazon and are doing ayahuasca in
Texas they encounter these giant snakes
in their first session it's somehow
there's a field around these medicines
and so when we open our mind we don't
simply open our mind we open up through
these fields into these fields and they
speak to us now
LSD has a it doesn't have a historical
field associated with it
you know a few years in the sixties it's
nothing compared to the fields
associated with ayahuasca or mescaline
or peyote
so it's relatively feel free and I think
it has and of course it also tends to be
a high-altitude psychedelic so many of
the organic psychedelics are much more
sensitively tuned to the nearby
psychedelic world which is it's a very
helpful and relevant psychedelic world
that the world of spirit guides the
world of Animal Collective psyches
angelic figures so on and so forth
Ellis Tate tends to be somewhat neutral
it doesn't have a lot of history and it
tends to drive into the high at high
levels it tends to try and into high
cosmological territory so I think it's
good for giving a list for me I think I
I drilled the deep bore hold in the
universe and it gave me a lot of
overview but it didn't give me a lot of
experience up
close with the nearby territory that is
explored and I've experienced in
ayahuasca sessions or in psilocybin
sessions that I did after I completed my
LSD work so you found those to be a good
adjunct for you they have been a good
add John and I wish that I hadn't been
smart enough to be using those adjuncts
all the way along during those 20 years
mm-hmm
and that's my partial 40 Chris's what
was it the me to choose LSD in 1979 when
you did versus say the magic mushroom
back this yeah
well it's I read Stan Grof work you know
Stan Grof published realms of the human
unconscious in 1976 I came out of
graduate school in 78 I read that book
and very quickly
LSD psychotherapy which came out in 1980
and this is what Stan had done his early
research work on this was material and
in my case I was able to find a way to
get high quality you know laboratory
grade LSD and so it was a combination of
I trusted Stan groves work his
methodology was really around LSD in the
early years and it was only because of
his research that I trusted my own mind
into going through this process and it
was the substance that was available to
me
what about which you take taking on five
Meo DMT it's becoming more and more
popular and I think it needs to be
discussed more let me just put it this
way I was on a panel discussion on
psychedelics and their role in the
future last weekend at a small
conference here and they we broke up
into groups and the panelists were asked
to sit in with some of these groups and
one of the people in the little group I
was in said you know her her view of
psychedelics she I think she'd had a
couple of experiences with them was she
thought they were a door that shouldn't
be opened so you know I say that in the
context of 5m EOT because I've had one
full-on experience with it and I mean
was absolutely stunning at the moment
where I just went oh my god that's what
I've been waiting to realize at the gut
level my whole life but now since then
that's like three months ago I really
have no idea how that it's informing my
ongoing spiritual awakening journey so I
don't know where that fits into the
pantheon as it were you know do you have
any feelings thoughts about that first
of all I don't have a lot of experience
with five amino dmt I've only done a
couple of sessions they were
ecstatically wonderful sessions they
were luminous sessions I did this years
after doing the LSD work so the mind I
brought to the to the five Meo DMT
experiences knocked in mind that I had
in the beginning of my LSD work it was
the mind that had been polished and
curated over all the years of that work
so i yealed
really to people who have more
experience with this substance in the
discussion it is striking how fast it
can drop you deep deep into the universe
but the speed within it dropped within
the speed with which it drops you in
deep into the universe and your time
there is so short and then yours back it
makes integration or healing or it's
better for opening doors and it is for
really deeply internalizing the
experiences that you you've opened into
which doesn't mean it's a bad thing
I mean opening doors and letting in the
brush of fresh air can be very helpful
but there's something one thing I have
learned about LSD is of course it's a
long day it's a big commitment it's
commits you to day before at least all
day session and a day after and on the
day of a session it's an eight-hour
commitment and you know usually about
five or six or seven hours you'd like oh
come on now let's get this over I'm
ready to come back but one of the things
that it does is by keeping you in these
states for long periods of time it
allows the mind that you're exploring to
polish the mind that is doing the
explore
because in this work you're always using
the mind to explore mind so the length
of time that you expend gives the
universe more time to heal you it gives
the universe more time to show you
things to teach you things and it
teaches me things over and over and over
again it really Peabody will teach me
something until it's sure that I've got
it and it'll keep this up for several
sessions in a row so I think there is a
certain polishing that takes place in
long sacred medicines that doesn't take
place in short acting sacred medicines
again that doesn't mean the short acting
sacred medicines are not useful and
they're not good it's just that it's
different the Native American traditions
and Brazilian traditions they have
preferred in many cases the longer
acting sessions peyote is longer acting
ayahuasca is longer acting the
psilocybin mushroom is not as long as
LSD but it's a longer acting substance
they consider the length of time that we
spend in these conditions to be special
and sacred you know and also I Rick
Strassman when he was doing his work on
5:00 on DMT not 5 Meo DMT but on DMT he
was surprised to find that while people
had very deep experiences in their their
DMT session he found that it didn't
really produce long lasting results for
the majority of them so it was something
about quick in quick out it's hard to
really convert that into a
transformational experience a lot of I
could certainly you know agree with with
that statement and kind of know when
you're talking about Stephen and the
five Meo just the DMT I was like it was
it was an experience alright but I was
like okay so how does that what I
couldn't nail any kind of like spiritual
experience or mysticism well there's
certainly mysticism I guess that's what
the word but it was you know it left me
with more questions because what I saw
was just really what was that what does
it all
right I could not I fir is hieroglyphics
and things that I was seeing what just
work I trusted my DNA and you know my
soul and spirit were giving it all but I
was like yeah I still yeah you know so
um yeah that brings up another related
question I think this like I don't know
if this is quite an exact accurate
assessment or you know description of
the journeys that you went on but the
way I remember it
correct me if I'm not quite getting the
exact nuance here was that you you had
that you said there were two parts to
every journey first two hours or so was
a lot of letting go sometimes I think I
remember you used the term exquisitely
painful before you broke out into the
living intelligence of the universe I'm
if I may say so I think you're perhaps
unusual in that sense in that you were
suited perhaps from your past you know
lives or whatever your destiny so to
speak karma in this lifetime to go to
these places but I and correct me if I'm
wrong but I think the majority of the
you know Psychonauts as it were you know
the people that we're going to be
talking to at the conference and so on
are not likely to go there and it's more
about having to get ourselves out of our
own way the healing that we need to do
so and what you know do you have some
thoughts on that you know where that's
at for most people yeah well I think
basically what I understand now that the
end is different than what I understood
at the beginning and it leads me to
approach working with non-ordinary
States differently now I'm kind of much
more patient with the slow gradual
developmental process rather than trying
to accelerate the process so far because
I thought in my early in my work I
thought the goal was to get someplace I
get to an end destination I get just
home I'd go home
or become one with God or I dissolve
into the primordial void and I had all
of those experiences but what I found
was they didn't have as long-lasting a
penetrating transformation on my person
as I thought they might in the beginning
and I also found when I went as deep as
I ever went into the diamond luminosity
I found that what I initially had felt
like absolute homecoming the sweetest
most totally soul satisfying homecoming
in that moment I was shown given a
series of experiences it showed me that
there is an infinite territory beyond
where I was so that the idea of getting
to the end of a journey was just I let
it go it didn't work anymore so now
instead of trying to reach some
spiritually defined definition or end
state of enlightenment or Nirvana or
oneness with God now I feel much more
patient with opening up taking what's
given to you healing receive the
teaching but keeping it within a measure
that's kind of more practical so that
there may come time when you want to go
up periscope
you know take a deep look around but a
lot of the really productive work I
think is done at a lower level we don't
have to tear apart our psyche as deeply
as I did or other people do sometimes in
order to really remember who we are
remember what's happening in history so
I guess I I would counsel a gentler
approach into these things
good ones yeah oh and some ossifer who
had a deep passion to understand how the
word world was put together you know
that part of me I wouldn't trade the 73
days for anything on earth I mean they
just
it gave me an understanding of how the
world works which has changed my heart
changed my life yeah and you know what
and your work for this for this lifetime
to to share that right so when there's
no sin of going gentler maybe you could
share with people a little bit about
what you hope to accomplish or what you
hope people might walk away with at the
end of the workshop you're going to do
on the following weekend after the
conference you know I know what I've
experienced I know what's living inside
me as living memories I'm trying to
figure out how I can make these useful
to other people I know that there are
things that I know and there are things
that I understand I know that when I
begin to get into the memory of these
events when I begin to describe them or
that they get activated within me I know
that my consciousness changes just in
the talking about them I'm still trying
to figure out how I can make this this
living experience which is only mine in
a little certain way it's I didn't give
myself these experiences the universe
toward these experiences in with me how
can I make these available to people or
whatever maybe it's not making them
available how can I be of use to people
in their own spiritual practice given
the history that I've gone through now
that I'm beginning to do the workshops
that's what I want to explore I want to
explore for example when we're can we go
into guided visualization exercises when
people go kind of into deep relaxation
they're kind of a semi hypnotic state
can I work with them in a way which will
allow them to enter more deeply into
their own inner being because I've
explored some of these dimensions of my
own inner being and therefore I have a
certain sense of some of the ways the
maps can be drawn and I convert that
into something that will be useful to
people as they explore their own inner
being so just so that people understand
who
might be interested in coming to this
it's not going to be Chris bass yakking
at you for two days right you're going
to do a lot of exercises with people but
what I would I sense from what you're
saying and I you know I have great
things Stephen we're not doing yellows
right
yeah no first no no nothing but you what
I hear you saying and I accept it 100%
because I know that you know you're
saying it from a point a place of
humility is that your energetic field
from what you've accumulated in your
learning could have an influence
energetically on the room while they're
doing that is that a correct way of
putting it I think so what happened with
my so-called individual experiencing my
deeper consciousness but the larger
consciousness the mind of the universe
had an effect on my students which was a
combination of healing and liberating
and kind of causing them to face things
in their life that they may not were
initially wanting to face but when they
did it had a very beneficial outcome so
that I know that my being and they're
beings are interconnected in these very
very subtle ways so I would think that
something similar happens whenever
people gather in groups with a shared
intention and they're engaged in
meaningful exercises which everyone kind
of chooses to participate in that our
energies interacts their energy comes
into me my energy flows into them and
the question then becomes for what can
we do with our shared intention how
deeply can we take this what insights
can we you know trigger and what healing
I find that when I teach in workshops
people the healings take place without
me intentionally treating doing it or
doing anything it's just when we get
together we open our hearts and minds
things happen beautiful you know just
from the Dept of wild ideas so to speak
have you ever considered doing something
like this with say a very light dose of
a psychedelic to amplify or potentially
deepen that collective possibility there
well that of course is the way
shamans typically work will often work
their client or subject will be using a
sacred medicine and they will use the
same sacred medicine perhaps a lighter
dose to go into these states together
that's an of course there's so much
history behind it we know that that
works well I've never done that first I
don't I don't I have chosen not to be a
therapist not to thought of work with
people going into psychedelic States
that was a conscious choice on my part
that's a different skill set you know
and I'm comfortable there but I chosen
to push my own limits rather than help
people push their limits but as a
teacher now this is something different
when because just opening our minds and
our hearts to these horizons has a very
powerful impact I find now I there may
come a time when I would do which are
suggesting that time is not now now if
my time is to sort of get the ideas out
to engage in the psychedelic circle and
see where our discussion and exercises
can take us and also I at the end of
this work I don't want to go too deeply
into this but basically at the end of my
work there were energies that were
moving deeper and deeper into my
physical body into my psychological body
and then deeper internalization process
and I realized at the end of my work
that in order to let this process mature
and complete itself I had to not alter
my consciousness I had to not amplify it
I had to sit still and let these
energies
to me rather than go out to meet them
you're talking about even having to stop
using cannabis for that reason didn't
you well with the cannabis but when I
let me back up and tell a different
story
or on that when I stopped my sessions in
99 I had been given so many gifts and
there were so many treasures that I had
been given I thought that stopping my
sessions would be a pretty
straightforward process I could just
stop and I would be able to remember and
be nurtured by these many wonderful
experiences but what I found was that it
was more complicated than that
what I found is that I had entered so
deeply and so intimately into dimensions
of the universe and dimensions of the
divine you know that when I stepped back
into time-space consciousness and I knew
that I was my journey my psychedelic
journey was it's over at least this part
of my journey was over over the years I
entered into a very kind of deep
existential sadness I was literally
suffering from withdrawal of the divine
from the divine I just I knew I would
never have the type of ecstatic joy that
I had had in my deepest sessions where
becoming light transformed there and I
think I got developed an over attachment
to marijuana during this period because
I was kind of self-medicating and the
marijuana allowed me to kind of stay a
little bit above the earth and not come
completely off the mountain and
eventually I had to address that and to
get that up in order to come completely
off the ground off the mountain to get
completely grounded in time-space in
order to continue the integration
process that had been taking place
inside the sessions themselves so my
work a lot of my work and it's not that
I never touch it I don't just like
adults at all but my work is primarily a
contemplative work now and one of the
things I'm experimenting with is how to
build how could
take classical spiritual practice which
for me come out of the BOD Rihanna
tradition some of these classic you know
daily exercises guru yoga exercises
meditation contemplation exercises how
to empower those by drawing upon my
memories of these specific states of
consciousness which are relevant to
these outcomes so it's I'm trying to
develop as forms of spiritual practice
which consciously integrates psychedelic
experience without trying to replicate
them sounds like a good sort of
long-term plan for people heading toward
eldership hey Mark it's been an hour or
more what do you think should we wear
we're pretty much ready to wrap it up
it's almost an hour because I feel like
we can dig in go deep every time we
speak with you Chris and of course you
want to leave something for the guys who
and Al's who come the conference of
course and for the two-day workshop
which is the place to really go into the
deep dive but but I just love so much of
what you shared today there's some
things that really stuck with me and one
was just about gestation birth and
convulsions
it really really kind of struck a chord
with what's kind of happening in the
future as well as just some of your
other you know brilliant insights in
terms of your work so I personally thank
you for that and I look forward to
meeting you again this year at the
conference I don't know Steven you got
something else you want to you know
rabbit-hole you want to go down no
absolutely not no I mean that's a long
discussion and a lot of great stuff came
out I hope for people I just hope a lot
of people see this and then come and see
you know come to the conference if
they're not already you know signed up
to do that and you're gonna do your
little FB l33 thing today mark you just
did it Steve what it is then it's a no
it's not like some five Meo or you know
33 for anybody watching this or
you know wanting to come to the
conference since the prices are up a
regular price is just a discount that
we're offering you for watching the
video and being part of our community
being curious looking for answers being
on the path and yeah so FB l33 is
something there for you there and we're
just always happy to connect with you
Chris I look forward to another great
weekend and another great VIP party we
look forward to that one too we had a
good time left we had a good time and I
just I'm really honored and looking
forward to coming back to Vancouver
coming into the conference when I was
there last time I had just finished
writing the book and stages and that was
all about the book that's going to come
and now the book is out the book will be
available in Vancouver for the first
time and I'm just so pleased to be able
to bring it to this particular audience
because I was so moved by all the
participants in last year's conference
and the excellent speakers that you had
gathered this our real living by talent
the vinyl community that you've created
there it's just a pleasure and am
honored to be back there wonderful hey
mark before we go though maybe you
should just say wee bit more about this
workshop that chris is going to be doing
cuz it sounds like it's going to be
amazing to me I actually can't go myself
or I would definitely go I'm going to
post it in the comments of this
interview of this conversation but it's
really a talk on this book and Chris can
tell us more about the event but it's
going to be on the I know let me just
pull up the dates you call them I think
you already explained it I'm thinking
more about if you get tickets and
whatnot I'm gonna put that out here cuz
it's right here I just didn't have it to
have my ready sure it's going to be the
Friday and Saturday the weekend
all right the conference and it's going
to be two full days with a meal provided
I think right yeah lunch yeah it's gonna
get the lunches it's going to be an
opportunity to really settle down and
sink deep into the mystery into this
material but it's also it's a dialogue
it's about sharing our experiences and
processing them together and exploring
different exercises
so that we can not just absorb these
ideas that intellectually but absorb
them in our hearts and psychologically
into our souls when they're from really
looking forward to it it's it's a new
it's a new adventure for me and I think
it's gonna be a lot of fun great I've
just shared it in the comment section on
on the Facebook feed so for anybody
interested they can find it there it's
on this very planet Medicine website
consoling Network website it is all out
there and it's in some promotional
materials and emails going out with our
pre and post conference events as we get
geared up for for a month leading up to
the conference it's going to be go time
it's kind of what makes me thrive and go
a little crazy I mean I enjoy the
pressure because it's a the pressure
seems to be what it takes to get things
done for me yeah thank God for a
deadline yeah you know and and and Marc
deserves an immense amount of credit
because you're working really hard at
this mark yeah I'm just enjoying the
process learning new things every time
because there's a lot of you know moving
parts and also that's like Steve says
Stephen says to me today you got that on
your list mark and I go list I'm
supposed to have a list so yeah it's
it's go time we're four weeks away four
weeks away tomorrow so anybody other
there wanna come happy to have you there
and we're looking to be a self sold-out
crowd there might be one day tickets
available but yeah happy to to see it
all happen for the ninth year thank you
Chris again for for being part of it a
second year in a row and cause deep my
pleasure
also authors even it's never a day
without my fix of Stephen gray so that's
it today and thank you everyone for
watching any questions you can always
comment message us and connect through
our many different social media feeds so
thank you very much and take care of
yourselves out there happy journey